# Contributing to ed4e

Nice! You want to be a part of the ed4e system for Foundry VTT. We're happy to see contributions.

All types of contributions are valued. Please make sure to check the following:

- read this guide ;)

It will make things for us maintainers much easier, and the process faster and smoother for all.

If you like to contribute but can't do it in code or don't have the time, there are other ways to help:

- Report bugs
- Write or improve documentation
- Share it with others, e.g. on social media
- Tell us your feedback
- Star the project
- ... and more!

## Table of Contents

## How can I Contribute?

### 🐛 Report Bugs

Before reporting a bug, please make sure to check existing issues to see if it has already been reported. If you find
it,
feel free to add additional information in the comments.

When you create a new bug issue, include as many details as possible.

Please use our [templates](https://github.com/patrickmohrmann/fvtt-earthdawne4e/issues/new/choose).

### ✨ Suggest Features

Suggest some cool new stuff! As with bug reports (and issues in general), please check existing issues first to avoid
duplicates.

Please use our [templates](https://github.com/patrickmohrmann/fvtt-earthdawne4e/issues/new/choose).

### 📝 Improving Documentation

For many people, this is the biggest chore. At the same time, it is one of the most valuable things to have. Your
contributions can include:

- Fixing typos
- Adding examples
- Clarifying confusing sections
- Translating documentation
- ... and more!

### 🔧 Contribute Code and Content

You can code or create content like art, sound, or other assets? Awesome! Make sure of the following:

- there always is an open issue for whatever it is you are contributing
- if there is no open issue for your contribution, please open one first to discuss the change
- make sure your issue is not a duplicate of an existing one

For more info, have a look at [Development](#Development).

## Disclaimer for generative AI

> Creativity is made by people, for people.

We don't know if generative AI is here to stay, but acknowledge that it's becoming more and more used.

_No AI is used for the generation of any kind of assets, texts, and other creative media. All sources must be indicated
accordingly._

People might use it to support the development process. If you do so, please make sure to:

- review and test everything thoroughly
- never blindly copy-paste code or content generated by AI tools
    - => everything must be checked and understood
    - => _no vibe coding!_
- make sure you have the rights to use and distribute any content generated by AI tools
- clearly state in your contribution which parts were generated by AI tools, if applicable

We strive to keep generative AI to a minimum.

## Development

### Getting started

1. Clone the repository and place it in `Data/systems/ed4e` of your Foundry VTT user data directory.
2. If you haven't already, install [Node.js](https://nodejs.org/en).
3. Install dependencies by running `npm install` in the project root.

### Common Commands

| Command                                                                       | Description                                                                                               |
|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| `npm install`                                                                 | Install project dependencies                                                                              |
| `node <yourFoundryInstallation>main.js --dataPath=<yourFoundryDataPath>`      | Start Foundry VTT from the command line                                                                   |
| `node gulp.js --color --gulpfile <yourSystemDirectory>/gulpfile.mjs default`  | Start watching LESS files and auto-compile to CSS                                                         |
| `node gulp.js --color --gulpfile <yourSystemDirectory>/gulpfile.mjs buildCSS` | Build CSS once                                                                                            |
| `node gulp.js --color --gulpfile <yourSystemDirectory>/gulpfile.mjs lint`     | Run the ESLint                                                                                            |
| `node gulp.js --color --gulpfile <yourSystemDirectory>/gulpfile.mjs buildAll` | Build all artifacts for release (currently only CSS)                                                      |
| `node tools/pullJSONtoLDB.mjs`                                                | Create compendia entries from JSON data files (make sure the working directory is set to the project root |
| `node tools/pushLDBtoJSON.mjs`                                                | Export compendia entries to JSON data files (make sure the working directory is set to the project root   |

### Workflow

#### Branching model

- `main` is the trunk and always represents the next release
- No direct pushes to `main`
- Work happens in branches
- Branches are rebased on `main` before first push
- Branches are deleted after merge
- [Conventional Branch](https://conventional-branch.github.io) for branch names:
    - `main` for the main branch
    - `feature/ticket-number-clear-concise-description` for new features
    - `bugfix/ticket-number-clear-concise-description` for bug fixes
    - `hotfix/ticket-number-clear-concise-description` for urgent fixes
    - `release/x.y.z` for release branches
    - `chore/ticket-number-clear-concise-description` for non-code tasks like dependency, docs updates, etc.

#### Feature branches

- Work locally as long as possible
- Clean up commits before pushing
- Add changes to CHANGELOG.md
- Open PRs only when the feature is coherent and builds

#### Pull Requests

- Keep it small and focused
- PRs are merged using merge commits
- At least one approval is required
- Add a [gitmoji](https://gitmoji.dev/) at the beginning of your PR title
- Each commit should be meaningful and buildable
- CI must pass before merge

### Coding

Try to follow existing code style and patterns as best you can. Always clean up lint before submitting:

- `npm run lint` to check code
- `npm run lint:fix` to fix issues automatically

Dependencies should be kept to a minimum. If you want to add a new dependency, please discuss it in the related issue
first.

#### Testing

The project has Vitest set up as a framework for unit testing. However, this is still a hobbyist project and the main
chunk of the code relies on the Foundry VTT API. This means that there are not many tests written yet, since a lot of
functionality needs to be mocked.

If possible, try to include unit tests for all production code that you write. The test code follows a mirrored
structure of the production code in the "tests" directory. All unit tests must be successful when merging into `main`.

#### Commit Messages

[Conventional Commits](https://www.conventionalcommits.org) style for commit messages. They are enforced
through [commitlint](https://github.com/conventional-changelog/commitlint/tree/master/%40commitlint/config-conventional),
with the following
type prefixes:

- `build:` for build related changes or external dependencies (example scopes: gulp, npm)
- `chore:` for maintenance tasks
- `ci:` for CI/CD related changes (example scopes: github-actions, workflows, husky)
- `docs:` for documentation changes
- `feat:` for new features
- `fix:` for bug fixes
- `perf:` for performance improvements
- `refactor:` for code changes that neither fix a bug nor add a feature
- `revert:` for reverting previous commits
- `style:` for code style changes
- `test:` for adding or updating tests

For more information you can have a look at
the [Angular convention](https://github.com/angular/angular/blob/22b96b9/CONTRIBUTING.md#-commit-message-guidelines).

The usual best practice should be followed, like using the imperative mood, keeping messages concise yet descriptive,
and providing additional context in the body if necessary.

## Internationalization (i18n) and Localization (l10n)

You can help making the system approachable to a broader audience by adding localizations in a language you are
proficient in. To do so, you still need to set up a development environment and make pull requests, since the
localization files are part of the code.

### Setup and Workflow

Foundry VTT has its own [i18n](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Glossary/Internationalization)
[framework](https://foundryvtt.com/api/classes/foundry.helpers.Localization.html). Please have a look at
the [Foundry Knowledge Base for localization](https://foundryvtt.com/article/localization/) or the [Foundry VTT wiki
entry for localization](https://foundryvtt.wiki/en/development/api/localization).

If the language you are providing localization for has no JSON file yet, you can create a new one in the _lang_
directory if you feel comfortable with that. Otherwise, feel free to get in touch with the maintainers of the
[GitHub repo](https://github.com/earthdawn-vtt/fvtt-earthdawn4e/). They can set it up for you accordingly.

There are different plugins for IDEs or even entire software to support the i18n process. Some examples are:
- [i18n-ally](https://github.com/lokalise/i18n-ally)
- [easy-i18n](https://plugins.jetbrains.com/plugin/16316-easy-i18n)
- or any you can find in this wonderful resource: [awesome-i18n](https://github.com/oh-jon-paul/awesome-i18n?tab=readme-ov-file#-desktop-apps-for-translation-management)

#### Committing _lang_ files

⚠️ <strong>Important</strong>: We use pre-commit git hooks that work on _lang_ files. You can only ever commit
**one lang file** at a time. This is necessary so we can have all lang files always have the same exact keys.

When you commit a _lang_ file, it is taken as the lead file. Based on this, **all other** lang files will be updated to
include any keys that exist in the lead file, but the other files do not have. These keys then get a default value with
a "TODO" to easily find and identify missing localizations.

After a successful run of the commit hook, all other lang files will be modified, which means they need to be committed
as well. Each one on their own. Since you should always only work on one file at a time, these commits don't introduce
changes to your leading file. You can indicate the "auto update" in the commit messages.

This is a bit more effort that is well worth it for always having consistent _lang_ files. It also makes it easy to
find missing localizations by just searching the file for "TODO".

We suggest you do not commit the other files until the very end. They are continuously updated when committing to your
main file. When you are done with your file, you can commit all others once at the end. This makes up the following
suggestion:

_Once_
1. Setup your working/dev environment
2. Install all node dev dependencies (`npm install`) / activate pre-commit hooks
3. Add a new _lang_ file if not present

_Workflow_
1. Search your _lang_ file for keys that have a value containing "TODO"
2. Look up the localization of the key in the other files (English first)
3. Add your localization
4. Make commits along the way
5. Commit all other, auto-updated lang files
6. Push your branch and make a pull request

### Guidelines for Localizations

Understanding what and who localization is for is crucial. This is how other people enjoy the game that is based on 
language. It's no easy feat, so thank you for supporting with your contributions.

We are not professionals and still ask you to adhere to the following guidelines at a minimum:

- For Earthdawn specific terms: follow the terminology from official Earthdawn products, if available (e.g.
Player's Guide, Game Master's Guide, etc.)
- Make sure to use the most recent Earthdawn terminology from the official
[Errata and Clarifications document](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1ts_bx53HtB5-ThUxzHFsCPM4-g9wjIzHdJLdGy4XcfY)
- Be aware that the localization is not for _you_, but every person using your language
  - Don't use insider jokes/knowledge
  - Be empathetic of different cultures, mindsets, capabilities, and the like
- Keep it simple (for layout reasons in the program, as well as literacy of users)

## Releases

We follow [Semantic Versioning](https://semver.org/).

Releases are created from short-lived `release/MAJOR.MINOR.PATCH` branches. They are taken care of by the maintainers.

### Step-by-Step Release Process

If you are a maintainer, please follow these steps to create a new release:

1. Trigger GitHub Action Workflow "Release [1] - Prepare New Release" from the main branch
    - Choose version increase (see [Semantic Versioning](https://semver.org/))
    - Creates a new release branch "release/_version_"
    - Updates manifests
2. On the new release branch:
    - Final translations
    - Styling fixes
    - Severe bug fixes only
3. Trigger GitHub Action Workflow "Release [2] - Start Release"
    - Updates changelog
    - Creates tag
    - Creates Pull Request
4. Last check of and approve-merge of PR
5. If all checks are successful, a new GitHub release is automatically created and pushed to the Foundry VTT package 
manager
